well good evening everybody
and welcome to my planetarium show for
april of 2021
this show is put together using a
software called stellarium which you can
download for free
and what i'm going to show you is the
sky at night
as it would be on the 17th of april in
the middle of the month
so we're just going to let the sun
begin to set down towards the west here
in the sky you can already see another
object
right up in the top corner there
and here we go the sun's setting down
towards the west we're letting time
run forward at much greater than normal
speed
and as it goes down towards the horizon
we get the traditional colors of sunset
over the landscape and we'll bring
things to a halt
just as the sun disappears
so that we've got the twilight sky and
we'll go and see
the first couple of objects that have
become visible
so first of all we've got the crescent
moon a very thin
crescent here and as shown in this image
under these conditions you often can see
the
unlit the unsunlit side of the moon
reflecting back what's called earth
light where
the earth is uh bouncing light
onto the moon and back again so well
worth going and having a look
and also hiding in the twilight our last
chance really to see it
uh for quite a while to come actually
another two years before we get another
good view
is the planet mars um so if you haven't
seen it now is the time to go and have a
look you'll need a telescope to see it
well because it is quite small
and we see the disc here and two of its
moons phobos and demos
fear and panic now if we look
in detail at the surface of mars we can
see
the large volcanoes on the surface three
in a row towards the bottom
and one much larger one the large one is
olympus
mons the largest volcano in the solar
system
so we'll pull back away from mars
and let time run on forward a little bit
so that we've got a properly dark sky
and all the rest of the stars have now
come out
and mars and the moon are in the
constellations of
taurus at the moment but we're not going
to
investigate taurus we've done that in an
earlier show earlier in the year when it
was better placed
what we're going to do is run the clock
forward to 9 15
so that we've got a proper dark sky
you'll see one or two satellites
zipping around and there's awful lot of
space junk up there these days
and the stellarium software knows about
it all and knows where to plot it
so you can use it to find things like
when the international space station is
going to be visible
so now that the sky is properly dark a
quarter past nine let's have a look at
the first
constellation of our tour and that's the
constellation of
gemini the twins here's the stick
figures
showing clearly the uh the two men stood
side by side holding hands there
and there's the artwork you can just see
the tips
of the horns of the bull taurus
with mars just between them but
just next to mars at the foot of gemini
we've got some very interesting objects
and we're just going to show you this
one which is an exploded star
a supernova remnant where a giant star
blew up some time ago
and has left this cloud of expanding gas
which will gradually dissipate into the
interstellar medium
we're not exactly sure when it happened
it's at least three thousand years ago
but
uh hard to tell so it might be thirty
thousand
that's the jellyfish nebula in the foot
of gemini
there are several other images several
other objects that we could
find and take images of with our
telescopes and cameras
in the constellation of gemini but i
haven't got time to go into them all
this evening what we're going to do is
swing over to the west a little bit
and what run time forward to midnight
because i want to show you that it's
galaxy season
and particularly i want to show you a
couple of constellations that are
absolutely stuffed full
of interesting galaxies that you can go
and find
so we'll bring the time forward to
midnight you see the sky
rotating there as the earth turns
underneath it
and the first constellation is this one
leo
the lion it almost looks like a lion
it's one of the ones there's the stick
diagram which
actually the outline does seem to
suggest an animal
as it's supposed to be and there's the
lion in all its glory
with the long tail at the back
i think you can still see those stars do
outline it very well
but as i say there are several groups of
galaxies so we'll start with
this one here based around m95
this is a spiral galaxy and it's part of
a group
so we've got m95 there about 37
million light years away from us and you
can see the other galaxies here's
m96 we'll go in a bit closer for this
one
you can see the spiral structure of it
around the bright nucleus there
and that's the sort of view you'll get
through a small telescope
and then we'll go along and look at the
third main member of this group
messier object number 105 which is the
brightest of these three galaxies that
we see
together and m105
is an elliptical galaxy quite a large
one
and it has these two other companion
galaxies
that it's likely to merge with at some
point in the future
and so we'll see those in many billions
of years as an even larger single galaxy
and i imagine that all of the ones we've
just seen are going to form together
into a single galaxy eventually
now here towards the tail of the line
we've got the leo triplet the famous one
that is messier 66 65
and an object that charles messier
missed
ngc 3628 which is the one at the top
there
we'll zoom in on that because we're
looking at this one edge on and i think
it shows a very interesting aspect
with the dust lane carving across the
middle looks a little bit like a sort of
a sandwich or a hamburger
we've got the bright nucleus obscured by
all of that dust and
dirty material in the plane of the
galaxy so it looks
quite strange but the other two look
very much more like classic spirals
now we can go over to a different shape
galaxy a bard
spiral ngc 2903
the catherine wheel and this one very
much shows the
red color in the center of old stars
red and orange stars and the blue stars
in the spiral arms picking out where new
star formation has been happening
recently
and that's quite a bright galaxy i'm
again surprised that charles messier
missed that one so that's uh
all in the constellation of leo
just at the moment though we've got a
wanderer passing through
and that is the brightest of the
asteroids
asteroid vesta and this is not the
largest of the asteroids that would be
asteroid series number one so vesta is
about half that size about 500
kilometers across
series is 950 but
nevertheless it comes closer to the
earth and so we see it
more brightly and small
round objects almost large enough
to be classified as a dwarf planet but
um well i think it should have been but
uh
it does have a very large crater on one
side and is quite elliptical so
a bit of a debate about that one as to
whether that should or shouldn't count
as a dwarf planet it looks round enough
to me
so that's vesta now you won't see that
as a anything other than a
tiny point of light even with a powerful
telescope but you will see it move
so now if we swing next door to the
constellation of virgo
and we uh pick the outline out first
there
showing the stick diagram you see that
bowl
shape at the top and there's uh virgo
herself overlaying on it
so the bowl shape is made up of her
torso
and head region and what we'll do is
look inside here because
there are absolutely loads of galaxies
you can see some of them here
um there's a whole host of different
galaxies spiral galaxies elliptical
galaxies
uh lenticular galaxies all mixed
together
this is all part of the huge virgo
cluster
which is about 50 million light years
away
and contains so much mass that is
pulling everything including the milky
way galaxy
in towards it so we will eventually be
merged with the galaxies of the virgo
cluster
so now we're going to let time run on
it's about midnight
at the moment in british summer time
we're going to head on to the very early
morning just before dawn
and see what objects we've got in the
dawn sky
so i'll let time run and the sky will
spin
round and then we'll swing over to the
east
once we get to the uh the right time
coming up on midnight now here comes a
uh
the the ground coming up from the bottom
that's not a
collection of ufos it's just a
simulation of house lights on the ground
but we're going to change our aspect
pull back a little bit
and then swing over to the east
there's the milky way running down to
the horizon
and we're looking at the constellation
of sagittarius the archer
with the stick diagram i tend to see
more of a teapot
than an archer but i think
the artwork shows how that's supposed to
be joined up
so we'll take the artwork away and we'll
zoom in
on some of the star clouds of
sagittarius
this is looking towards the heart of the
milky way galaxy
there's absolutely loads of different
star-forming regions
this is the eagle nebula with the very
famous pillars of creation that were
photographed
so spectacularly by the hubble space
telescope right in the center there
so it's interesting to go and look for
those
just below it we have the swan nebula
now the very bright part is supposed to
be the swans
wing with its head and neck and beak
being rather
faint over to the left hand side there i
think you can see the neck
kind of swinging up around and then the
head's almost invisible but
uh below it again
the lagoon nebula here a young star
cluster has been formed
and is blowing a bubble out of its
cocoon
of gas that it was formed in i think you
can see how
all those bright stars are blowing away
a huge
cavity in the gas cloud that they formed
from
there and that pink color is the color
from hydrogen
gas we can see that again here in the
trifid nebula with the dark dust lanes
cutting across it but we can also see
some blue colored gas
and that is reflecting light from very
hot blue
young stars that again have been born in
this star-forming region
so we'll pull back a bit there's the
lagoon nebula again
and the star clouds of sagittarius a
very rich
hunting ground to go exploring for
objects
never very high above the horizon for us
in the uk
so this is about the first chance to see
it during the year it
turns up at a more civilized time later
in the year
now over here we've got a planet for
planet jupiter
and some of its moons and you can see
this in the dawn sky at the moment
it will get better during the year as it
gets
higher in earlier
times of the night so we'll get it
coming to opposition in about
august i think and here we would see the
very high resolution view with the cloud
belts and all the storm systems on the
surface
they're absolutely spectacular and this
is the sort of photograph
i can take with my 14-inch reflector
telescope
in my own observatory of that sort of
quality
now we'll just pull back and show you
the positions of some of the
moons the four large ones discovered by
galileo
orbit around jupiter and the closest in
is this one
io which is about the size of the
earth's moon
but if we zoom right in and the voyager
spacecraft
image here it's absolutely covered in
yellow and
other forms of sulfur even the black and
the red is sulfur
and that's because it's the most
volcanic world in the solar system
constantly erupting and bursting
forth material on resurfacing itself
and i thought i'd just show you this
time a couple of jupiter's smaller moons
which you do need quite a powerful
telescope to track down
this is amalfia the fifth largest and
fifth brightest of jupiter's moons
orbits closer into jupiter than io
in a little group of moons that's
amalfia
and just over here we've got adastria
another one slightly smaller again but
there are a group of them that orbit
interior to io
and so they don't take very long at all
to whiz around
but they are really tiny and uh you may
just pick them up with a powerful
telescope
as a point of light i think at our
public observing
evenings at the institute of astronomy
in cambridge we have
uh tracked down a couple of them on
occasions
going back to the larger galilean moons
this is europa
again about the size of our moon same
size as io but covered in ice
the ice is cracked you can see the
cracks and grooves running across the
surface there
and beneath that ice we think there is a
habitable
warm salty ocean kept warm by
gravitational forces
in a tug of war the same heat source
that keeps
io erupting all those volcanoes
the third moon out is ganymede and this
is the largest moon in the solar system
it's bigger even than the planet mercury
covered in interesting glacial
formations on the surface
and some craters so a mixed terrain but
again it looks like a geologically
active
world and we also think that there is
a briny ocean underneath that crust
which again might be a habitable or even
inhabited
zone in the solar system
the fourth of the galilean moons just
slightly smaller than
ganymede is callisto and this is not
geologically active it's not
taking part in the tug of war that the
other three moons
undergo with jupiter it's minding its
own business further away
and has a very old and inactive
geologically
uh surface covered in impact craters
so we'll pull back away from jupiter now
and sling ourselves
slightly over to the right on the screen
and another bright object
which will be the planet saturn just
here
very close to jupiter in the sky at the
moment
you can zoom right in and get the view
that you would get with a small
telescope
with the planet and its rings and one or
two of the moons
you can almost always see the bright
moon titan over to the left there
and it's a challenge to try and count
off how many other
moons of saturn you can track down but
if we zoom right in for the
powerful telescope view this is the sort
of image that i can get with my
telescope
i can pick up five six seven eight of
saturn's
moons i can see the uh gaps between
the different rings there the dark
cassini
division and the further out towards the
edge there
the n key division now if we have a look
at titan titan always looks like a sort
of orangey color
and that is because what we're looking
at is the orange smog
of organic materials in this atmosphere
of titan which is about 150
as dense as our own so it's really got
quite a substantial atmosphere
again a planet-sized moon about the same
size
as the planet mercury um all sorts of
interesting uh
weather and rain and things made of
methane
and liquid natural gas on the surface
there
but i'm afraid our time is up now and
the sun will be up
very very shortly and the stars will
fade away
as the dawn comes up so i will have to
bring the show to an end
there i hope you've enjoyed that and
i'll see you for the next one